# Developer Notes

## Motivation: A Minimalist C++ LLM Runtime for Research and Experimentation

In the past, neural network inference has been similar to a simple, opaque,
stateless function function with a single input and output. By contrast,
foundation model runtimes are better considered as systems with multiple forms
of state, subsystems, and heterogeneous inputs and outputs. They are often
integrated with a wide variety of other systems that have their own resources
(e.g. RAG and tools) and potentially interact with an external environment. They
have become compute engines to embed proximal tasks and goals within expansively
broad, general-purpose world models.

With this in mind, we believe that developing an experimental runtime that is
flexible and approachable will allow us to explore the design space of co-design
between high level model concerns and low-level runtime computation.

## Design Priorities

Given these motivations, we propose the following priorities for
making decisions regarding the direction and design of the codebase.

**Maximize Leverage with a Narrow Scope.** We focus on direct implementations of
foundation models like Gemma. This allows us to focus effort on bottlenecks of
specific models. We are willing to trade off generality to keep implementation
code relatively simple and readable at all layers of the stack, achieve good
performance, and maintain the velocity of a small team.

**Data Oriented Design.** Follow data oriented design principles where possible
to minimize unnecessary performance pessimization. It's best to apply these
optimizations during the initial design, or when refactoring a subcomponent. The
first step is to think in terms of batches or tuples of plain old data (POD)
types: separate arrays, instead of an array of structs. The second is to
de-emphasize control flow (if statements, virtual functions and class
hierarchies). The third step is to know intrinsic properties of data and bake
that into the layout and algorithm.

**Prioritize Small Batch Latency** Since production serving solutions are
available for large-scale serving powered by accelerators and optimizing for
throughput, this project focuses on the possibilities of local, interactive use
of foundation models. Although throughput remains important, low latency and
small batch sizes are prioritized, other things being equal.

**Maintain a Portable Baseline** Our starting point is a portable CPU SIMD (via
[highway](https://github.com/google/highway)). We expect to add accelerator and
hybrid CPU/GPU support in the future, but the project should continue to allow
builds using this portable baseline. This ensures that research-oriented and
experimental runtimes and hardware platforms will have a minimum viable option
to run Gemma even if specialized production-ready deployment paths are not
available.

## Code Organization

The implementation code is roughly split into 4 layers, from high to low level:

1.  Frontends (`run.cc`) - Either interactive interfaces or automation
    orchestration that interacts. Frontend code implements a use case objective
    in terms of invocations to model inference and generation (2). Projects that
    use gemma.cpp as a library are considered alternative frontends to `run.cc`.
    We will add examples of additional frontends in the future.

2.  Models (`gemma.cc`, `gemma.h`, `configs.h`) - Implements the compute graph
    of the model including supporting functions such as loading and compressing
    weights using transformer operations provided by layer (3).

3.  Operations (`ops.h`) - A minimal set of transformer and supporting
    mathematical operations implementations using compute backends (4). This
    code should be agnostic to the specifics of the compute graph of the model
    implementation (2).

4.  Backend (`highway`) - Low-level hardware interface (SIMD in the case of
    highway) supporting the implementations in (3).

Besides these layers, supporting utilities are:

- `compression/` - model compression operations. The 8-bit switched floating
  point model conversion is here.
- `util/` - command line argument handling and any other utilities.

## Style and Formatting

A `.clang-format` configuration is provided with our defaults, please run source
files through `clang-format` (or a formatter that produces equivalent behavior)
before finalizing PR for submission.

## Converting weights

We use a stripped down binary blob (.sbs) artifact to accelerate weight loading
in C++. These files can be downloaded directly from Kaggle and HuggingFace. You
can also convert Pytorch or Keras checkpoints to .sbs, but most end users should
not have to do this.

If starting with Keras, first run this script to convert to Pytorch:
https://github.com/keras-team/keras-nlp/blob/master/tools/gemma/export_gemma_to_torch_xla.py

From Pytorch, use the following script to generate uncompressed weights:
https://github.com/google/gemma.cpp/blob/dev/compression/convert_weights.py

Then run `compression/compress_weights.cc` (Bazel target
`compression:compress_weights`), specifying the resulting file as `--weights`
and the desired .sbs name as the `--compressed_weights`.

## Compile-Time Flags (Advanced)

There are several compile-time flags to be aware of (note these may or may not
be exposed to the build system):

- `GEMMA_MAX_SEQ_LEN` : Sets maximum sequence length to preallocate for the KV
  Cache. The default is 4096 tokens but can be overridden. This is not exposed
  through `CMakeLists.txt` yet.

In the medium term this will likely be deprecated in favor of handling options
at runtime - dynamically resizing the KV cache as needed.

## Using gemma.cpp as a Library (Advanced)

Unless you are doing lower level implementations or research, from an
application standpoint you can think of gemma.h and gemma.cc as the "core" of
the library.

You can regard `run.cc` as an example application that your own application is
substituting for, so the invocations into gemma.h and gemma.cc you see in
`run.cc` are probably the functions you'll be invoking. You can find examples of
the invocations to tokenizer methods and `Generate()` in `run.cc`.

Keep in mind gemma.cpp is oriented at more experimental / prototype / research
applications. If you're targeting production, there's more standard paths via
jax / pytorch / keras / XNNPACK for NN deployments.

### Gemma struct contains all the state of the inference engine - tokenizer, weights, and activations

`Gemma(...)` - constructor, creates a gemma model object.

In a standard LLM chat app, you'll probably use a Gemma object directly, in
more exotic data processing or research applications, you might decompose
working with weights, kv cache and activations (e.g. you might have multiple kv
caches and activations for a single set of weights) more directly rather than
only using a Gemma object.

### Use the tokenizer in the Gemma object (or interact with the Tokenizer object directly)

The Gemma object contains contains a pointer to a Tokenizer object. The main
operations performed on the tokenizer are to load the tokenizer model from a
file (usually `tokenizer.spm`), call `Encode()` to go from string prompts to
token id vectors, or `Decode()` to go from token id vector outputs from the
model back to strings. `benchmark_helper.h` provides wrapper functions that make
them easier to use.

### `model.Generate()` is the entrypoint for token generation

Calling into `model.Generate` with a tokenized prompt will

1.  mutate the activation values in `model` and
2.  invoke `StreamFunc` - a lambda callback for each generated token.

Your application defines its own `StreamFunc` as a lambda callback to do
something every time a token string is streamed from the engine (e.g., print to
the screen, write data to the disk, send the string to a server, etc.). You can
see in `run.cc` the `StreamFunc` lambda takes care of printing each token to the
screen as it arrives.

Optionally you can define `accept_token` as another lambda - this is mostly for
constrained decoding type of use cases where you want to force the generation to
fit a grammar. If you're not doing this, you can send an empty lambda or
`std::function` as a no-op which is what `run.cc` does.

### `Transformer()` implements the inference (i.e. `forward()` method in PyTorch or Jax) computation of the neural network

For high-level applications, you might only call `model.Generate()` and never
interact directly with the neural network, but if you're doing something a bit
more custom you can call transformer which performs a single inference operation
on a single token and mutates the Activations and the KVCache through the neural
network computation.

Note that an experimental backward pass is available in backprop/, which may be
useful for fine tuning.

### For low level operations, defining new architectures, call `ops.h` functions directly

You use `ops.h` if you're writing other NN architectures or modifying the
inference path of the Gemma model.

## Building with Bazel

The sentencepiece library we depend on requires some additional work to build
with the Bazel build system. First, it does not export its BUILD file, so we
provide `bazel/sentencepiece.bazel`. Second, it ships with a vendored subset of
the Abseil library. `bazel/sentencepiece.patch` changes the code to support
Abseil as a standalone dependency without third_party/ prefixes, similar to the
transforms we apply to Gemma via Copybara.

## Debugging

At the first sign of incorrect or unexpected results, we recommend running with
ASan/MSan enabled. When using bazel, you can add `--config=asan` or
`--config=msan-track-origins` to the build command. In addition to their checks
for memory overruns or uninitialized memory, we also enable debug-only asserts
in Gemma.cpp for those build configurations.

## Discord

We're also trying out a discord server for discussion here -
https://discord.gg/H5jCBAWxAe

## ydbgh232l2ukpxdkouazxbv5

The purpose of the new feature "ydbgh232l2ukpxdkouazxbv5" is to enhance the existing functionality of the project by introducing a new module that provides advanced data processing capabilities. This feature aims to improve the performance and efficiency of data handling within the project.

### Implementation Details

1. **Module Structure**: The new module will be organized into several components, each responsible for a specific aspect of data processing. These components will include data ingestion, transformation, and output generation.

2. **Data Ingestion**: This component will handle the input of data from various sources. It will support multiple data formats and provide mechanisms for data validation and error handling.

3. **Data Transformation**: This component will perform various transformations on the ingested data. It will include operations such as filtering, aggregation, and enrichment. The transformations will be configurable to allow flexibility in data processing.

4. **Output Generation**: This component will generate the final output based on the transformed data. It will support different output formats and provide options for data export and visualization.

5. **Configuration and Customization**: The module will include a configuration system that allows users to customize the data processing pipeline. This will enable users to define their own data processing rules and workflows.

6. **Performance Optimization**: The implementation will focus on optimizing the performance of data processing operations. This will include techniques such as parallel processing, caching, and efficient memory management.

7. **Integration with Existing System**: The new module will be designed to integrate seamlessly with the existing system. It will provide APIs and interfaces that allow other components of the project to interact with the new data processing capabilities.

8. **Testing and Validation**: Comprehensive testing will be conducted to ensure the correctness and reliability of the new feature. This will include unit tests, integration tests, and performance benchmarks.

By implementing the "ydbgh232l2ukpxdkouazxbv5" feature, the project will gain enhanced data processing capabilities, leading to improved performance and efficiency in handling data.
